.Dd July 18, 2026
.Dt LANDSTRIP 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm landstrip
.Nd run a command inside an OS-level sandbox
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl -debug
.Op Fl -format Ar format
.Op Fl -trap-fd Ar fd
.Op Fl p Ar policy | Fl -policy Ar policy
.Ar command
.Op Ar argument ...
.Nm
.Fl V
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
loads a policy, lowers the sandbox configuration into the platform sandbox
model, applies that sandbox, and then executes
.Ar command .
If no policy file is specified, the policy document is read from standard
input.
.Pp
The accepted policy format is the subset of Anthropic Sandbox Runtime
settings that
.Nm
uses. Unknown fields are ignored.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -debug
Enable debug logging.
.It Fl -format Ar format
Select the policy format. The accepted values are
.Va json
and
.Va yaml .
The default is
.Va json .
.It Fl -trap-fd Ar fd
Write landstrip trap responses to the already-open file descriptor
.Ar fd
in JSON format. The descriptor must be 3 or greater. On Linux, filesystem denials
observed by the seccomp broker are emitted as JSON objects with the same field
names as trap responses. The option is best-effort on backends that do not
expose per-access denial callbacks.
.It Fl p Ar policy , Fl -policy Ar policy
Read a policy file. This option may be repeated. Later policy arguments
are merged over earlier policy arguments. Object values are merged recursively,
arrays are concatenated without duplicates, and scalar values replace earlier
values. Commas are literal filename characters.
.It Fl V , Fl -version
Print version information and exit.
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Print usage information and exit.
.El
.Sh POLICY
The relevant policy shape is:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  "filesystem": {
    "allowWrite": [".", "~/.cargo"],
    "denyWrite": [".git/hooks"],
    "denyRead": ["~/.ssh"],
    "allowRead": ["~/.ssh/config"]
  },
  "network": {
    "allowNetwork": false,
    "httpProxyPort": 8080,
    "socksProxyPort": 8081,
    "allowLocalBinding": false,
    "allowUnixSockets": ["/run/user/1000/agent.sock"],
    "allowAllUnixSockets": false
  }
}
.Ed
.Pp
When
.Fl -format Ar yaml
is used, path fields can also be written as one statement per non-empty line:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
filesystem:
  allowWrite: |
    .
    ~/.cargo
  denyRead: |
    ~/.ssh
  allowRead: |
    ~/.ssh/config
network:
  allowNetwork: true
.Ed
.Pp
Relative sandbox paths are resolved against the directory where
.Nm
was started. Absolute paths are used as-is. The
.Sq ~
and
.Sq ~/
prefixes resolve to the current user's home directory.
Path entries use the same syntax as the macOS sandbox runtime: absolute paths,
relative paths, and gitignore-style
.Sq * ,
.Sq ** ,
.Sq ? ,
and character-class globs.
Concrete (non-glob) paths are resolved when the sandbox is created.
On Linux,
.Va denyWrite
glob patterns are evaluated dynamically by the seccomp broker at each write
attempt, so files created after sandbox startup are also blocked.
On macOS, glob patterns are snapshot-expanded when the Seatbelt profile is
compiled and do not protect future matching files; a warning is logged.
.Pp
Write access is denied by default. The
.Va allowWrite
paths are granted. The
.Va denyWrite
paths are subtracted: on Linux, the seccomp broker checks each write
against both concrete deny paths and glob patterns dynamically; on macOS,
denied subtrees are carved out of the allowed roots at sandbox creation time.
Non-glob deny paths are canonicalized and enforced on all platforms.
.Pp
Read access remains unrestricted when
.Va denyRead
is empty. When
.Va denyRead
contains entries, read access is lowered to an allowlist by traversing from
.Pa /
and subtracting denied paths. Entries in
.Va allowRead
are then added back to the read allowlist.
.Pp
For TCP port rules,
.Nm
uses Landlock TCP port rules and a seccomp user-notification broker for
address-level decisions. When the sandbox is applied, direct TCP connections are
denied by default.
.Pp
.Va httpProxyPort
and
.Va socksProxyPort
select local HTTP and SOCKS proxy ports. Connections to these ports are allowed
only on loopback addresses.
.Nm
does not start proxies or set proxy environment variables; the caller supplies
those when needed. Domain filtering is likewise a caller/runtime responsibility.
Without
.Va allowLocalBinding ,
direct TCP remains denied except for configured proxy ports. Domain allowlist
settings are ignored.
.Pp
.Va allowLocalBinding
permits binding to local TCP ports and connecting to loopback TCP addresses on
any port, including listeners started outside the sandbox. Linux denies
non-loopback connections. On macOS, the required Seatbelt
.Dq localhost
matcher can also include addresses assigned to other local interfaces, but
public remote addresses remain denied.
.Pp
On Windows, per-port TCP filtering is not implemented. A policy that requests
proxy ports is accepted but unenforceable, so the AppContainer runs without
network capabilities and all network access is blocked. A policy that requests
local binding and loopback connections is rejected before launch.
.Pp
.Va allowUnixSockets
permits pathname Unix socket
.Xr connect 2
and
.Xr bind 2
operations under listed paths. Relative paths are resolved against the
sandboxed process current directory. Abstract and unnamed sockets,
.Xr socketpair 2 ,
and inherited descriptors are not path-mediated.
.Va allowAllUnixSockets
permits new Unix sockets without path checks. By default, new Unix sockets are
denied.
.Pp
Unix socket policy is unsupported on Windows and is rejected before launch.
.Sh SANDBOX MODEL
Landlock rules are tied to filesystem objects opened while the sandbox is
created, not to path strings. If an allowed directory is removed and the same
pathname is created again later, the new directory is a different filesystem
object and is not automatically allowed unless an allowed ancestor covers it.
Existing open file descriptors are not retroactively revoked.
.Pp
The traversal step gives deny rules snapshot semantics. Directories created
outside the sandbox after policy setup are not exposed merely because their
paths match a previous traversal result.
.Pp
On Linux,
.Nm
splits filesystem enforcement between Landlock and a seccomp user-notification
broker. Landlock is the primary layer and does as much as the kernel can decide
on its own, with no per-syscall round trip. Because Landlock grants access to
filesystem objects rather than path strings, and cannot express a deny nested
inside an allow, the policy is lowered first: denied subtrees are carved out of
the allowed roots and only the surviving fragments are installed as
.Va LANDLOCK_RULE_PATH_BENEATH
rules. A denied path is therefore never added to the ruleset, and reads, writes,
and executes under the allowed roots are enforced by the kernel in-process. This
is the only layer active when the policy needs nothing more than static roots.
.Pp
The seccomp broker is added when the policy restricts writes or reads, and it
covers what Landlock cannot. It intercepts the open family
.Pf ( Xr openat 2 ,
.Xr openat2 2 )
together with the path-based mutator syscalls, resolves each argument to a real
path against the calling process, and decides the access. The broker is also the
only layer that can report a denial to the launcher, so it owns the
.Fl -trap-fd
and standard-error trap stream.
.Pp
The two layers are kept deliberately disjoint to avoid deciding the same access
twice. Mutators that Landlock already governs \(em
.Xr renameat2 2 ,
.Xr linkat 2 ,
.Xr symlinkat 2 ,
.Xr unlinkat 2 ,
.Xr mkdirat 2 ,
.Xr mknodat 2 ,
and
.Xr truncate 2 \(em
are observed by the broker only to surface a trap; the denial itself is left to
Landlock unless a trap query is enabled. Operations that lie outside Landlock's
access rights \(em ownership, timestamps, and the extended-attribute calls such
as
.Xr fchownat 2 ,
.Xr utimensat 2 ,
and
.Xr setxattr 2 \(em
have no kernel-level coverage, so for those the broker is the sole enforcer and
always applies the allowlist. An open or mutation outside every allowed root is
thus reported once: by the broker when it owns the decision, and by Landlock's
.Er EACCES
otherwise.
.Pp
On macOS,
.Nm
uses Seatbelt path rules.
.Pp
On Windows,
.Nm
uses a Less-Privileged AppContainer. The backend creates or reuses a
deterministic AppContainer profile and grants that AppContainer SID access to
the lowered read and write roots with Windows ACL entries. Because LPAC has no
broad filesystem read capability, Windows policies must use explicit read
allowlists; unrestricted read policy is rejected. The profile and the ACL grants
are released when
.Nm
exits, so the container keeps no access to the policy roots once the tool is
done; they can outlive a
.Nm
that is killed outright.
.Sh OUTPUT
.Nm
reports failure and completed-denial events as JSON objects on standard error,
one object per line. Pending Linux query events go only to
.Fl -trap-fd Ar fd . Each object has a fixed
.Va kind
discriminant and a stable
.Va code
naming the stage that failed, not the operating system that reported it: the
same code is raised by every backend that has that stage, and the platform
detail rides along in the record. The trap kinds are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va filesystem
A filesystem access denial, with
.Va code
.Va FILESYSTEM_DENIED ,
an
.Va operation
of
.Va read
or
.Va write ,
a
.Va reason
of
.Va allow_miss
or
.Va deny_match ,
and a
.Va mechanism
of
.Va seccomp ,
the user-notification broker being the only layer with a per-denial callback.
.It Va network
A denied TCP connect or bind, with
.Va code
.Va NETWORK_DENIED ,
an
.Va operation
of
.Va connect
or
.Va bind ,
and a
.Va target
of
.Ar address : Ns Ar port .
.It Va launch
The sandbox was installed but the tool did not start, with
.Va code
.Va LAUNCH_FAILED ,
the
.Va program ,
and its symbolic
.Va errno
where the platform has one.
.It Va usage
The command line was rejected, with
.Va code
.Va USAGE_ERROR .
Reaches standard error only: the trap descriptor is part of the arguments that
failed to parse.
.It Va internal
Everything that fails before the tool runs. The
.Va code
names the stage:
.Va POLICY_PARSE_FAILED ,
.Va POLICY_IO_FAILED ,
.Va SANDBOX_SETUP_FAILED ,
.Va SUPERVISE_FAILED ,
.Va PLATFORM_UNSUPPORTED ,
.Va INTEGER_TOO_LARGE ,
a
.Va POLICY_ Ns * validation rejection, or
.Va INTERNAL_ERROR
for a failure the code space does not name. A
.Va mechanism
of
.Va landlock ,
.Va seccomp ,
.Va seatbelt ,
or
.Va appcontainer
accompanies
.Va SANDBOX_SETUP_FAILED .
.El
.Pp
Failure traps are accompanied by a human-readable log line; the JSON is what
machines should read. Logs and sandboxed command output are not part of the trap
response. Normal successful command execution does not print a trap because
standard error belongs to landstrip and standard output belongs to the sandboxed
command.
.Pp
When
.Fl -trap-fd Ar fd
is used,
.Nm
writes broker-produced traps, including pending Linux queries, to that file
descriptor. Each trap is emitted as a
single line with no whitespace; the example below is indented and wrapped only
for readability. A Linux filesystem denial carries these fields:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  "kind": "filesystem",
  "code": "FILESYSTEM_DENIED",
  "state": "info",
  "query_id": "0",
  "operation": "write",
  "path": "/repo/out",
  "requested_path": "out",
  "syscall": "openat",
  "errno": "EACCES",
  "flags": ["O_WRONLY", "O_CREAT"],
  "reason": "allow_miss",
  "suggested_grant": {"allowWrite": "/repo/out"},
  "mechanism": "seccomp",
  "process": {"pid": 1234, "exe": "/usr/bin/sh", "cwd": "/repo"}
}
.Ed
A Linux broker launch failure also reaches
.Fl -trap-fd Ar fd
while the descriptor remains open. This trap stream is separate from the
sandboxed command's standard output and standard error.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
On success,
.Nm
is usually replaced by
.Ar command
and returns that command's exit status. When seccomp user notification is needed,
.Nm
supervises the sandboxed child and exits with the child's status. If policy
loading or sandbox setup fails,
.Nm
reports a coded trap and exits non-zero. Usage errors exit with status 2.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jarkko Sakkinen Aq Mt jarkko.sakkinen@iki.fi
